* [About the Project](#about)
* [Acknowledgments](#acknowledgments)
* [Participating Institutions](/jay/participating_institutions)
* [Quotes &amp; Comments](#comments_and_quotes)
<a name="about"> </a>

*The Papers of John Jay* is an image database and indexing tool
comprising some 13,000 documents (more than 30,000
page images) scanned chiefly from photocopies of the
originals. Most of the source material was
assembled by Columbia University's John Jay publication
project staff during the 1960s and 1970s under the
direction of the late Professor Richard B. Morris. These
photocopies were originally intended to be used as
source texts for documents to be included in a planned
four-volume letterpress series entitled *The Selected Unpublished Papers of John Jay*.


Unfortunately only two volumes of the series appeared before Morris’s
death in 1989, *John Jay: The Making of a Revolutionary, Unpublished Papers 1745-1780 (New York: Harper &amp; Row, 1975)* and *John Jay: The Winning of the Peace, Unpublished  Papers, 1780-1784 (New York: Harper &amp; Row, 1980)*.


When the project closed in 1996, the 
photocopied documents were transferred to the
Rare Book and Manuscript  Library. Shortly thereafter
Elaine Sloan, then University Librarian, established
an Advisory Board, consisting of Barbara Black,
George Welwood Murray Professor of Legal History
at Columbia; Patricia Bonomi, Professor of History
Emerita at New York University; Barbara
Oberg, then editor of the Benjamin Franklin Papers
at Yale University; and Herbert Sloan, Professor
of History at Barnard College, and convened by
Gouverneur Morris Professor of History Richard
L. Bushman, to make recommendations about the future
of the project.


**Letterpress Edition and Database.** The Advisory Board recommended that
Columbia continue to pursue plans for the letterpress edition under a new
editor. Funding was secured in 2004 from the National Historical Publication
and Records Commission for a revised and updated selective letterpress edition
that would include seven volumes and be completed by 2012. The Advisory Board
also recommended, however, that the Libraries address the more immediate need
for scholars to have access to the still-unpublished material collected for the
original project by seeking funding to digitize and mount those documents on
the Web.


The National Endowment for the Humanities agreed with this aim and provided a
two-year grant for the project for the years 2000-2002. Additional funding was
provided in 2001 by the Florence Gould Foundation.The *Papers of John Jay*
database was launched initially in December 2002.


**Expansion &amp; Enhancement Initiative.** From March 2003 to March 2006
Columbia University Libraries continued to expand the content and enhance the
functionality of the database, drawing upon staff and funding provided by the
new Columbia Libraries Digital Program initiative, which had been established
in 2002. At the time of its initial launch in December 2002 the database
included Jay documents from about fifty institutions; by 2006 this number had
risen to ninety. During this period over 1,500 new documents (ca. 12,000 page
images) were also added, including 1,300 color scans from original documents in
Columbia’s Rare Book &amp; Manuscript
Library.


**Future Prospects.** *The Papers of John Jay Papers* is designed to be a
working tool for students, scholars and the interested public. It remains a 
work in progress. New documents can be added, corrections to existing
information made, and identifications completed by using the
<a href="#" onclick="return DCV.FeedbackModal.show();">**comments form**</a> or
by writing to the Rare Book and Manuscript Library at Columbia. We look forward
to collaborating with our users in making this an effective and useful resource.


**Rights and Permissions.** Intellectual property rights to the materials on
this database remain with the owning repositories. People wishing to publish or
otherwise use images found on this database must contact these institutions for
information and permission. Please  consult as well the
**[Copyright &amp; Use](http://library.columbia.edu/about/policies/copyright-online-collections.html)**
statement referenced on the John Jay Papers home page.


**Image Quality.** Please note: the quality of some of the images is not ideal.
Because we were attempting to make available as soon as possible material that
had been collected forty years ago, salvaging some of the hard work that had
been done by various generations of project editors and assistants, we
approached the project differently than we would have had we been starting from
scratch with new scans and new photography. Although digitization has in some
cases made the documents far more legible than they are in the original, we are
aware that in other cases they remain hard to read. Scans, photocopies and
microfilmed images of 18th-century manuscripts under the best of circumstances
are not always clear, due to deterioration of ink or paper, bleed-through, and
uneven surfaces. The quality of computer monitors also varies dramatically. To
assist readers, we have provided some capacity to enlarge and enhance the
images. Better images and information about the documents themselves may be
found by contacting the owning repositories, using the contact information
provided. Messages indicating that images are not available at this time may
occur for a variety of reasons, including the reluctance of an owning institution
to allow its property to be included. In the few cases where we have not been
able to decipher a repository name and the source is listed as “Unknown,”
questions may be directed to the Columbia University Libraries by using the
“Comments” field.
