####(1787)
<a name="philadelphia" id="philadelphia"></a>
Although not in attendance at the meeting convened at Annapolis in September 1786 for the ostensible purpose of resolving interstate commercial disputes, Jay anticipated by almost a month the address to the states drafted by Alexander Hamilton and adopted on 14 September. That address called upon all the states to send commissioners to a new convention at Philadelphia in May 1787 to discuss not only commercial problems but _all_ matters necessary "to render the constitution of the Federal Government adequate to the exigencies of the Union." Meantime, as early as March of that year Jay had expressed support for a constitutional convention with much broader objectives. [_Jay to Washington, March 16, 1786_, [8420](/jay/ldpd:54422), [10391](/jay/ldpd:500217) (no image)]. More specifically, he spelled out in a letter of 18 August to Jefferson his strong views on the need for reconstructing the federal government [[5860](/jay/ldpd:39122)]. "The people," Jay reported later in the winter to Lafayette, "were divided in sentiment respecting the expediency" of such a course [_February 16, 1787_, [5886](/jay/ldpd:38984), [2493](/jay/ldpd:17298)], and he was even doubtful that anything constructive would ensue. At best, Jay conceded, "no evil" was "to be apprehended" from such a meeting, and in the longer run, "much good."

Jay was undoubtedly the most influential proponent of constitutional reform who was denied an opportunity to attend the Philadelphia convention. Adams later said that Jay was "of more importance than any of the rest, indeed of almost as much weight as all the rest." Adams himself and Jefferson, two of the other principal absentee Founders, were serving abroad at the time and unavailable, but Jay who was on hand and ready and willing was ignored. His name was not even placed in nomination either in the New York State Senate or the General Assembly. When Hamilton, who had been selected, attempted to expand the New York delegation from three to five and urged Jay's appointment, his motion was defeated. Despite his strong Federalist proclivities, Hamilton was acceptable to the legislature, even to the antifederalist Assembly, because of the general feeling that some constitutional reform was needed, and New York ought to send the author of the Annapolis report to Philadelphia. But one such delegate was thought to be enough. To check Hamilton's possible extremism, and to provide balance to the delegation, the legislature also chose Robert Yates and John Lansing, men of moderate views not yet clearly identified either with federalism or antifederalism, who could, if necessary, form a majority against their brilliant colleague.

While Jay was not a delegate and the Convention's deliberations were secret, there is some evidence suggesting that Jay was not inhibited from attempting to publicize his views among certain delegates. Prior to the convening of the Philadelphia meeting, as we have seen, Jay advanced some of the notions embodied in the Randolph Plan, including enlarged powers for Congress and the President, separation of powers, and checks and balances. On 25 July 1787 he addressed a letter to George Washington, the Convention's presiding officer, advancing the view that the Chief Executive should be a "natural born citizen," a suggestion to be embodied in Article II, Section 1, Clause 5 of the Constitution. [[10627](/jay/ldpd:68356), [12782](/jay/ldpd:79158)]

Some three weeks later he drafted a petition for the New York Manumission Society calling upon the Convention to give consideration to the manumission of slaves and the protection of freed blacks, but evidently on the advice of Hamilton, on leave from the Convention, he and his fellow members abstained from formally petitioning Congress.

While Jay complained that the protracted meeting in Philadelphia made it impossible to muster a quorum of nine states in Congress, essential to any action being taken on foreign affairs matters, [_Jay to John Adams, July 4, 1787_, [2503](/jay/ldpd:17238), [7463](/jay/ldpd:48326)] he approved the secrecy of the Convention's proceedings and believed that the longer the Convention lasted the likelier it would be productive of substantial changes in the federal structure. Once his father-in-law William Livingston went to the Convention as a New Jersey delegate in July, replacing William Paterson, who was obliged to return home, Jay began to receive communications which, while revealing nothing of substance, took on an optimistic tone. Despite his reservations about untramelled democracy, Jay had faith in the wisdom of the people and believed that, in the end, they would approve the Convention's results. As he wrote Jefferson on 8 September, "there is...a degree of intelligence and information in the mass of our people which affords much room for hope that by degrees our affairs will assume a more consistent and pleasant aspect." [_Jay to Jefferson, September 8, 1787_, [2514](/jay/ldpd:17178), [5907](/jay/ldpd:38860)]