####(1787-1788)
<a name="federalist"></a>
####The Great Collaboration

To refute the numerous articles critical of the Constitution which New York newspapers were carrying in the last week of September and the first week of October 1787 Hamilton conceived the idea of _The Federalist_. Initially Hamilton turned to Jay and William Duer as collaborators, and Jay responded at once, writing letters Nos. 2 through 5, while Duer's pieces were never used. Gouverneur Morris, though "warmly pressed," declined an invitation to participate. Turning out copy at breakneck pace, Jay had his initial letter, No. 2, published in the _New York Independent Journal_ on 31 October, No. 3 on 3 November, No. 4 on 7 November, and the fifth letter three days later. Either before he left New York around the middle of November, perhaps on the 17th, or upon his return to the city from a trip to Philadelphia, James Madison was invited by Hamilton to join the enterprise. This was fortunate for both content and continuity, for between 10 November, when the fifth _Federalist_ letter appeared, and some weeks prior to 7 March 1788, the date of publication of Jay's No. 64, the next and last contribution of Jay to that great seminal work, Jay suffered a serious bout of ill health. He seems to have been painfully crippled by rheumatoid arthritis, although he could report by 11 February 1788 that his health was "pretty well re-established."

Writing not many months after the collaborators had completed their contributions to _The Federalist_, Madison sent off a ciphered dispatch to Jefferson, naming Jay, Hamilton, and himself as the authors of _The Federalist_ and adding some illuminating facts: "The proposal came from the two former. The execution was thrown by the illness of Jay mostly on the two others. Though carried on in concert the writers are not mutually answerable for all the ideas of each other, there being seldom time for even a perusal of the pieces by any but the writer before they were wanted at the press and some times hardly by the writer himself." Years later Madison volunteered a different version of why Jay discontinued his contribution, if we are to believe an unidentified source. When the question was put to Madison he reportedly replied, "After a few numbers had been published, Mr. Jay remarked to him [Madison] and Mr. Hamilton, that his [Jay's] style of writing was not calculated for the undertaking in which they had embarked. It was too mild and placid; and requested them to Exonerate him from any further connection with the publication. To this they assented." There is no corroboration of this second account, and Jay's self-attributed sense of literary inadequacy is scarcely supported by prior or subsequent polemical writings. Jay's own letters in this period document the debilitating character of his illness.

<a name="riot"></a>

####John Jay and the Doctors Riot

That recovery was seriously jeopardized by the mishap that befell him as a participant in the Doctors Riot. The riot started on Sunday, 13 April 1788, when as a prank a medical student waved a dismembered limb at some boys below a window of the New York Hospital. The finding of dismembered corpses inside the building pointed to grave-robbing, and in the ensuing riot physicians and students from the hospital were forced to take refuge in the city jail. Hamilton, attempting to stop the rioters in front of Columbia College, was swept aside. Governor George Clinton and Mayor James Duane then sought to restrain the mob from attacking the jail, but even a small contingent of militia was chased away. By the following afternoon, with the jail still under siege, Matthew Clarkson and Jay, armed with their swords, marched toward the jail accompanied by some fifty militiamen. Jay was struck in the forehead with a stone, and others, including Baron von Steuben, similarly assaulted. Unconscious and bleeding, Jay, as his wife's letter to her mother of 17 April 1788 discloses, was carried home for emergency medical attention. Even reinforcements of a company of sabre-wielding cavalry galloping up Broadway failed to bring the rioting to a halt until the following day [_Sarah Livingston Jay to Susannah Livingston,_ [6480](/jay/ldpd:42756)]. For a time it was thought that Jay had suffered permanent brain damage. Evidently before this serious accident Jay must have completed his _Address to the People of New York_, a pamphlet which ranks with the _Federalist_ letters as among the most notable contributions of the pro-Constitution camp to the ratification movement.

After the onset of Jay's illness in late November of 1787, Madison took up the slack with alacrity, contributing Nos. 10 and 14 to the section on the "utility of the Union," and three more. Nos. 18, 19, and 20, to the topic of the "insufficiency of the present Confederacy to preserve that Union." Madison then proceeded to contribute his insightful analysis of the text of the Constitution.

<a name="authorship"></a>

####The Matter of Authorship

Of the eighty-five _Federalist_ letters, all published under the pseudonym "Publius" (the name taken from Publius Valerius Publicola, a founder and defender of the Roman republic), only four drafts are extant, and all four are in Jay's hand. It remains a mystery to this day why not a single one of the fifty letters attributed to Alexander Hamilton and the twenty-nine to Madison have been preserved except in printed form. Considering the fact that both Hamilton and Madison were meticulous collectors of their own writings and shared a profound sense of the importance of documenting the principal activities in which they were engaged, their disappearance must be attributed to an intense desire for anonymity at the time the letters were composed and transmitted to the printer.

The authors meant to keep the identity of "Publius" a well-guarded secret to avoid prejudicing readers who might be persuaded by arguments had they not been put off by the names of the conspicuous Federalists who were the authors. Madison revealed his role and the names of his collaborators in private correspondence but in New York not more than a corporal's guard must have known for sure of Hamilton's involvement. Jay's connection was even a deeper secret. Indeed, he was forced to deny a sensational rumor that he was opposed to the Constitution. Obviously, among Antifederalists his authorship of some of the _Federalist_ essays was not even a matter of speculation.

The absurd rumor about Jay's opposition to the Constitution first surfaced on 24 November 1787, when Philadelphia's _Independent Gazetteer_ reported an unnamed source as relating that "his Excellency John Jay, (a gentleman of the first rate abilities, joined to a good heart) who at first was carried away with the new plan of government, is now very decidedly against it, and says it is as deep and wicked a conspiracy as has been ever invented in the darkest ages against the liberties of a free people." The report was quickly reprinted in newspapers across the Eastern seaboard. Jay's friends stamped the story as an incredible invention. As Washington put it, "It is very unlikely therefore that a man of his knowledge and foresight should turn on both sides of a question in so short a space. I am anxious however to know the foundation (if any) for this." Washington rightly suspected that "the enemies of the Constitution leave no stone unturned to encrease the opposition to it." In reply, Madison branded the report an "arrant forgery," and warned the General that "tricks of this sort are not unknown with the Enemies of the Constitution."

As for Jay himself, he was quickly alerted. Tench Coxe in Philadelphia sent a copy of the newspaper to David L. Franks, requesting him to "shew it to Mr. Jay." Jay quickly authorized the publication of his denial [_Jay to John Vaughan, 1 December, 1787,_ [8166](/jay/ldpd:53456), [2566](/jay/ldpd:16894)], and it was listed by "One of the People" in a refutation of "Antifederal Arguments," appearing in the _Baltimore Maryland Journal_, 25 December 1787, wherein this and other "deceptions" were exposed.

Had Jay's role in the writing of the _Federalist_ been even suspected, it is highly unlikely that this trial balloon would have been floated. Moreover, by 24 November, the day the story first broke, Jay had withdrawn from the series because of illness, a fact that might have lent credibility to the allegation had his participation been known.

Whatever confusion of attribution survived publication of the _Federalist_ was compounded by the desire of both Hamilton and Madison at different periods of their lives to set the record straight and claim the credit for their respective contributions. In Jay's case it was left for his family to do so. It is known that John Jay II once had possession of all five of his grandfather's letters, but as of September 1891, when the third volume of Jay's _Correspondence and Public Papers_ appeared, its editor noted that the original draft of No. 2 was no longer extant. Although published anonymously like all eighty-five letters, there can be no dispute about Jay's authorship of these five letters in view of his holograph drafts and other incontrovertible evidence. In fact, Jay's authorship of these letters has never been seriously disputed. Some confusion, however, arose about No. 64, written on Jay's restoration of health, and it came about the following way.

Numerous lists identifying the authorship of the individual _Federalist_ essays have been attributed to both Hamilton and Madison; significantly, no such list has been attributed to Jay. The most authentic Hamilton list is found on the inside cover of Chancellor James Kent's copy of _The Federalist_ (first edition, 1788), now in possession of Columbia University Library. Kent wrote: "I am assured that Numbers 2, 3, 4, and 54 were written by John Jay," but the number "6" was superimposed over the "5" in "54" in Hamilton's own handwriting. Kent appended this notation to the list: "N.B. I showed this above mem. to General Hamilton in my office in Albany and he said it was correct saving the correction above made." Beneath this notation Kent wrote: "I have no doubt Mr. Jay wrote No. 64 on the Treaty Power. He made a Speech on that Subject in the N.Y. Convention, and I am told he says he wrote it. I suspect therefore from internal Ev[idence] the above to be the correct List, and not the one on the opposite page."

The "Kent list" thus becomes the only evidence of authorship in Hamilton's hand which is now extant. Because it refers to Hamilton as "General" and because the conversation alluded to took place in Albany, it was presumably written between 1800, the year in which Hamilton resumed his law practice after having been occupied with his duties as Inspector-General of the Army, and 1804\.

In the 14 November 1807 issue of the Philadelphia magazine, _The Portfolio_, notations reputed to be in Hamilton's handwriting and marked in a copy of _The Federalist_, attributed to Jay's authorship Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, and 54, and this attribution cropped up again in the so-called "Benson list," which Hamilton allegedly wrote in the office of his longtime friend, Judge Egbert Benson, two days before his duel with Burr. Therein the attribution of No. 54 to Jay was quickly corrected by a friend of Hamilton as an obvious slip for 64 when it was published. In any event, the unsigned memorandum on which the report was based mysteriously disappeared, and its evidential value has a lower ranking than the "Kent list."

Madison, whose recollection of the respective authorship of _The Federalist_ letters has been substantiated by studies of the internal evidence, may also have been guilty of a slip of memory in regard to No. 64. An article signed "Corrector," which appeared in the _National Intelligencer_ of 20 March 1817, and which according to its anonymous author was copied from "a pencilled memorandum in the handwriting of Mr. Madison," stated on "indubitable authority" that "Mr. Madison wrote Nos. 10, 14, 18, 19, 20, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 62, 63, and 64\. Mr. Jay wrote Nos. 2, 3, 4, and 5; and Mr. Hamilton the residue." Note that in this instance "64" could not have been a slip for "54," which is also, and in this case correctly, claimed for Madison.

When the historian-editor Henry B. Dawson was at work on his edition of _The Federalist_, which he published in 1864, he asked John Jay II to see the draft of No. 64, then in the Jay family possession. Jay's grandson obliged, and according to Dawson sent him "the original drafts of number LXIII" (later renumbered LXIV). Instead of returning them to the sender, as he had been explicitly directed to do, Dawson left the originals with the New-York Historical Society, and the librarian of that institution neglected to return the material to the Jay family. One of the two drafts remained in the Society's manuscript collection, its existence unknown until 1959, when Dr. Catharine S. Crary, a member of the staff of The Papers of John Jay, uncovered it in a box of Jay letters. If there was in fact a second draft, it has never been located since the Dawson-John Jay II exchange. In a memorandum accompanying the Historical Society's draft of No. 64, John Jay II stated: "Mr. Hamilton never claimed it, but Mr. Madison, although in one and I believe two clarifications of the authorship of the various numbers attributed 64 to Jay; in another, attributed 54 to Jay and 64 to himself."

In fairness to Madison, however, that contributor was either misquoted by "Corrector" or must have suffered a pardonable and rare lapse of memory in such matters. In three other places Madison correctly attributed No. 64 to Jay: (1) in an article in the _City of Washington Gazette_, 15 December 1817, which published a list claiming to have been "furnished by Madison himself"; (2) in the edition of The Federalist published in 1818 by Jacob Gideon, which based its attribution of authorship on James Madison's own "copy of the work which that gentleman had preserved for himself" (the 1809 edition by John Tiebout now in the Library of Congress); and (3) in a marginal note in Madison's hand found in a copy of _The Federalist_, belonging to Richard Rush, Attorney General in President Madison's Cabinet.

The fact is that only one _Federalist_ draft, that of No. 5, remained in the possession of the Jay family when the Jay Papers were acquired by Columbia University in 1959\. Copies of all known drafts have been made available to the John Jay Papers through the courtesy of the present or former owners. As the draft versions were undated, the editors have arbitrarily assigned to the drafts the date when the respective published version first appeared.

<a name="texts"></a>

####The Texts of John Jay’s _Federalist_ Letters

Jay's letters Nos. 2 through 5 first appeared in _The Independent Journal, or The General Advertiser_ , a semi-weekly paper edited by John McLean and Co., and a day or two later in both _The New-York Packet_ (edited by Samuel and John Loudon) and _The Daily Advertiser_, edited by Jay's former protege, Francis Childs. No. 64 first appeared in The Independent Journal of 5 March 1788, followed on 7 March with publication in The New-York Packet. In its original newspaper version it bore the number "63," but was renumbered in the first collected edition. All of Jay's essays appear in that first edition, printed by J. and A. McLean, corrected by Hamilton and published on 22 March 1788\. A second volume, containing the final batch of essays and containing no contributions from Jay, came off the press on 28 May 1788\. In addition to the McLean edition there were two further American editions and two French editions published during Hamilton's lifetime. The third American edition (1802), printed by George F. Hopkins, contained revisions made by John Wells, a New York lawyer, presumably approved by Hamilton. Hamilton himself appears to have made some minor changes in the essays written by Jay, but there is no evidence that Jay participated in either proofreading or revising any of these editions. In addition, Madison supplied Jacob Gideon, Jr., a printer of Washington, D.C., with corrections of the papers he had authored. The Gideon edition came off the press in 1818\.

<a name="variances"></a>

####Variances Between Jay's Drafts and the Printed Versions

A careful workman even under pressure, Jay labored over the drafts of the _Federalist_ letters printed below, and the published versions differ in some cases in significant ways, markedly in the case of No. 64\. Jay's first extant draft, _Federalist_ No. 3, followed up on the theme of the previous Jay letter, for which no draft has been located. _Federalist_ No. 2 stressed the sources of national unity, while overlooking a number of compelling areas of deep division--regional, ethnic, social, racial, and religious--and underplayed the opposition of a minority at the Constitutional Convention to the document as finally adopted. Jay's stirring concluding line quoted Cardinal Wolsey's comment when he learned of Henry VIII's decision to retire him, as Shakespeare has immortalized it (_King Henry VIII_ , Act III, scene 2).

_Federalist_ No. 3 [[13367](/jay/ldpd:500919) (no image)] opens with one of the rare passages in Jay's writings praising the American people as "intelligent and well informed." In the draft, significantly, the phrase "left to the" was excised and "well informed" appears without this critical reservation. This third letter focused on the role of a strong central government in preserving peace and security. The essay's principal significance lay in its incisive criticism of the separate states, which Jay depicted as more vulnerable to local pressures, more impulsive, more aggressive, and less able to manage foreign policy. One substantive change between the draft and the published version appears in the judicial machinery for the enforcement of treaties. Jay deleted the phrase "national courts" and substituted "courts appointed by, and responsible only to one national Government...." This change reflected his sensitivity to the fears shared by Antifederalists of a large federal judiciary administering a body of federal common law and undermining the authority of the state courts. Even Federalists like John Rutledge of South Carolina considered the establishment of inferior federal tribunals as "making an unnecessary encroachment on the jurisdiction [of the states], and creating unnecessary obstacles to their adoption of the new system." The Federal Convention had sidestepped the issue in Article III, which vests the judicial power in a Supreme Court "and in such inferior Courts as the Congress may from time to time ordain and establish." Jay tried to handle the ticklish issue with circumspection after reflecting the opinion of international jurists like Grotius in their differentiation between "just" and "unjust" wars, making the unique point that the federal government would be in a better position under the Constitution to prevent bellicosity on the part of the Americans themselves. Jay assumes, then, that all wars in which Americans participate were not necessarily just ones, and that the nation might be drawn into wars fomented by one or two states. Then a significant assertion: "Not a single Indian war has yet been occasioned by aggression of the present Foederal Government, feeble as it is, but there are several instances of Indian hostilities having been provoked by the improper conduct of individual States, who either unable or unwilling to restrain or punish offenders, have given occasion to the slaughter of many innocent inhabitants." In his _Explaining America: The Federalist,_ Garry Wills incisively commented on this passage: "For more than a century, in the history of the republic Jay was arguing for, condemnations of fellow Americans for slaughtering Indians would be rarely heard and harshly received. The virtuous republic disappears when people no longer question their own virtue."

In the draft of _Federalist_ No. 4 [[13331](/jay/ldpd:82194) (no image)], Jay anticipated the treatment of parties and factions which was developed in Madison's celebrated initial contribution, _Federalist_ No. 10\. Pursuing the theme of the importance of national union in averting conflicts with foreign powers, Jay begins with a quotation attributed to Addison on the effects of party conflicts: "The Parties and Divisions amongst us may [in] several Ways bring destruction upon our Country, at the same time that one united house would secure us against all the Attempts of a foreign Enemy." Then in the final paragraph of the draft Jay speculated that if foreign governments "find us either...destitute of an effectual Government...or split into Factions or three or four independent...Republics or Confederacies...what a poor pitiful Figure will America make?" Jay therein acknowledges the weight of one of the most forceful contemporary arguments against party and faction, the likelihood that they would lead to foreign penetration and the establishment of outposts of alien influence in American public life. In these fleeting references, which he subsequently suppressed and did not publish, Jay was obviously referring to the relationship between factions and geographic divisions. He must have concluded that the subject deserved more concentrated attention in a future installment, and it was to be Madison not Jay who would pick up the theme of "the spirit of party and faction."

The draft of _Federalist_ No. 5 [[10401](/jay/ldpd:66910)] reveals Jay's tendency as a prudent lawyer to tone down his language and avoid stridency. For example, in the seventh paragraph of the draft Jay originally observed that "they who find themselves unjustly suspected of unkind Intentions, are by that very Circumstance naturally led to entertain them"--a phrase which may have proved too revealing about Jay and his Federalist associates, or, more likely, enkindle suspicions about Federalists which Jay preferred not to arouse. He chose instead the more guarded language which appears in the final text: "Distrust naturally creates Distrust and by nothing is good will and Kind Conduct more speedily changed, than by invidious Jealousies and uncandid Imputations expressed or implied."

A second, more substantive, change was made in the very next paragraph of the draft. Discussing the potential for future hostility between a Northern and Southern confederation should America fail to unite under the proposed Constitution, Jay revealed certain Northern prejudices in his speculation that Northerners would "be tempted to gather honey in the more blooming fields and milder air of their luxurious and more delicate neighbours." Jay retained the adjectives "luxurious" and "delicate" in his final version in preference to "less hardy and less enterprizing Neighbors," which he deleted. Jay must have realized that, although the _Federalist_ was aimed at a New York audience, important Southern states still had to be persuaded to ratify the Constitution.

The paragraph that immediately follows is the longest in Jay's original draft of _Federalist_ No. 5\. Jay's draft suggested that mutual suspicion among the "three or four Confederacies" likely to emerge in the event the Constitution were rejected would create military establishments which "would oftener be turned against each other than against a foreign Enemy...." Jay must have concluded that the subject of standing armies, to which he had been led by his treatment of the consequences of disunion, needed more detailed analysis than could comfortably be contained within this one essay. Hamilton does give the subject a full-dress treatment in a later installment.

The concluding set of major changes from the original draft to the finished version of _Federalist_ No. 5 reveals Jay's sound editorial judgment in cutting down verbiage, with the reduction of three paragraphs to two, and in concluding with a single, pithy sentence. Here the major substantive alteration is the deletion of another provocative sentence, both out of place and striking an unnecessarily discordant note: "Wicked Men of great Talents and ambition are the Growth of every Soil, and seldom hesitate to precipitate their Country into any Wars and Connections which may promote their Designs." There was enough history to substantiate the assertion, with its prophetic cast, but sober second thoughts prompted its omission.

_Federalist_ No. 64 [[10753](/jay/ldpd:68966)], Jay's most important statement in the series to which he contributed--the only one of the five he wrote which deals with the text of the Constitution--draws upon his acknowledged experience in foreign affairs. Jay reworked this essay more than any of its predecessors, and in its published version it is substantially compressed and rewritten. These revisions suggest the possibility that Jay incorporated suggestions from Hamilton and even Madison, who left New York a day or two before No. 64 was published. Comparing the fourth paragraph of the draft with the third paragraph of the published version reveals Jay's constant effort to achieve a crisper style. Paragraphs five, six, and seven of the draft were either dropped or reworked. He deleted these specific verbatim points: (1) "The People at large may sometimes by Negligence or other Causes be led...into indiscreet appointments...." (2) "The State Legislatures very seldom lost Sight of their obvious Interests, or commit their Management to Men in whom they have little or no Confidence"; (3) "The People of America have not been hitherto sufficiently sensible of [the] Importance" of "the absolute Necessity of order and System in the Conduct of...national Affairs"; (4) "We must suppose that the Members from each State, however well disposed to promote the general good of the whole, will yet be still more strongly disposed to promote that of their immediate Constituents." The above statements reflect Jay's own doubts about the judgment of the people and his conviction that state legislatures were actuated by parochial rather than national interests. On second thought he must have realized that an essay designed to have popular appeal should not strike either note.

The paragraphs on "trade and navigation" and the necessity for secrecy and dispatch in the management of foreign policy (the last, a time-tested favorite of Jay's) similarly caused Jay stylistic problems, but they also include a variance of the first importance from the final version. In discussing treaty-making, the draft reads: "The Convention have done well therefore in so disposing of this power of making Treaties as that ~~while they~~ although the president ~~is restrained by~~, must in forming them act by the Advice and Consent of the Senate, yet ~~that he will be under no obligation to~~ he will be able to manage all affairs of secret Intelligence in the way in which Prudence and Circumstances may suggest." Compare this with the published version: "The convention have done well therefore in so disposing of the power of making treaties, that although the president must in forming them act by the advice and consent of the senate, yet he will be able to manage the business of Intelligence in such manner as prudence may suggest." Then follows in both the draft and final version Jay's opinion that the President could decide in "preparatory and auxiliary measures" the circumstances "which require the advice and consent of the Senate...." Clearly Jay interpreted the "advice and consent" provision of Article 2 of the Constitution to be a requirement in "forming" treaties but not in either preliminary negotiation or in steps to carry them out.

There is, however, at least a hint that Jay believed that the President could not act unilaterally in terminating a treaty. Both the draft and the published version contain this sentence: "They who make laws may without Doubt repeal them and it is equally true that they who make Treaties may alter and annul them." This observation seems to argue for the view that the advice and consent of the Senate are needed to terminate a treaty validly. Omitted erroneously from the printed newspaper version is the crucial sentence: "With Respect to the Responsibility of the President and the Senate, it is difficult to conceive how it could be increased." Jay's position on this question seems reinforced by his opinion in _Jones v. Walker_, written some six years later while he sat in the Virginia circuit as Chief Justice. Therein Jay maintained that a treaty could not be repealed or annulled but by the will of those who have authority to repeal or annul it, and that "no right can be incident to the judiciary to declare it void in a single instance."

_Federalist_ No. 64 goes on to deal with those provisions of the Constitution which declared that treaties had the force of law and that treaties made in pursuance of the Constitution were "the supreme law of the land." This interpretation is in accord with the supremacy clause of the Constitution, a provision founded upon the resolution of Congress ofApril 1787 that Jay had drafted.

In refuting the Antifederalist objections that under the Constitution two-thirds of the states could "oppress the remaining third," Jay incorporated a final series of changes from draft to published version which again opened windows into areas of his thinking, which he later chose to conceal. The No. 64 draft draws a parallel between the nation and the states reminiscent of the nationalist ideas contained in his earlier letters to Adams and Lowell mentioned above. As the original draft phrased it, "Every objection to the federal Constitution which [these criticisms] imply may at least with equal force be applied to this State [New York]. _Will_ the Governor and the Legislature of New York make Laws with an equal Eye to the Interest of all the Counties." On reflection, Jay deleted this passage from his final text. The notion of reducing the status of the states vis-à-vis the federal government to that comparable to the standing of their own counties within the state would have ignited those very fires of suspicion which the _Federalist_ letters were designed to allay. In the published letter Jay also dropped the last two concluding paragraphs, which by proposing that the treaty-making powers be given "a fair trial" weakened his argument.

While the explication of _The Federalist_ has burgeoned over the years, it is difficult to estimate its immediate impact on the public. The pro-ratification press in New York was laudatory, as were various correspondents of Jay and his collaborators. How many Antifederal voters were converted is speculative. For example, writing from "Flat Bush" on 24 December 1787, some "27 subscribers" informed the _New-York Packet_ that they were tired of seeing "Publius" in every paper and asked the printer to discontinue publishing the series.