####(March-April 1788)
<a name="address"></a>

Some time between the appearance of _Federalist_ No. 64 in March 1788 and the Doctors' Riot, which occurred in mid-April, was the period when Jay wrote his seminal paper, [_An Address to the People of the State of New-York, On the Subject of the Constitution, Agreed upon at Philadelphia, the 17th of September, 1987_](http://www.columbia.edu/cu/lweb/digital/exhibitions/constitution/address/index.html). The _Address_ was expected off the press by the 12th April, based on Jay's draft letter to Washington of that date, a day before Jay was seriously injured in the street violence of New York. It was written prior to the spring election of delegates to the state ratifying convention and indubitably aimed at influencing the electors' choices. No draft of the _Address_ is known to be extant. It has been evaluated as "far more important" than _The Federalist_ to the political battle to get the Constitution ratified in New York.

The _Address_ appeared as an anonymous pamphlet, considerably longer in text and more wide-ranging in subject matter than any of Jay's _Federalist_ letters. Unlike the letters of "Publius," Jay's _Address_ dealt with specific Antifederalist criticisms, most importantly those dealing with the absence of a bill of rights in the proposed Constitution and the desirability, as the Antifederalists saw it, of calling a second convention. The pamphlet format gave Jay ample opportunity to answer these points and to review the major arguments in favor of the Constitution: the weakness of Congress under the Confederation, the "virtue" and near unanimity of the Philadelphia framers, the Constitution's safeguards against the concentration of too much power, the unlikelihood that a better plan could be agreed upon by a second meeting, and the consequences to the nation of rejecting the proposed Constitution. The _Address_ was distinguished by its moderate tone and soundness of judgment. Jay's wife reported from Elizabethtown that it was received "with great approbation." [_Sarah Jay to Jay, June 19, 1788,_ [6520](/jay/ldpd:42520)] A more objective observer, writing from Poughkeepsie on 3 June, remarked: "Had the pamphlet attributed to Mr. Jay made its appearance a little sooner, I am well persuaded there would have been a still more complete revolution in the minds of the people. That publication treated the subject as relative to us in the proper light: as the States one after another came into the measure the great political controversy gradually changed its ground, and what was once a question on the _merits_ of the Constitution now becomes only a question of public expediency and policy." Jay resisted Franklin's suggestion that he make his authorship known in order to add to the weight of the document [_Jay to John Vaughan, June 27, 1788,_ [2567](/jay/ldpd:16888), [8144](/jay/ldpd:53576)], but, according to Sarah Livingston Jay, Jay's "well known style" gave him away in any case. [_June 19, 1788,_ [6520](/jay/ldpd:42520)] On 8 June 1788, Washington sent Madison a copy, although he had "little doubt" of Madison's having received a copy of it. "It is written with much good sense & moderation. I conjecture but upon no certain ground, that Mr. Jay is the author of it. He sent it to me sometime ago, since which I have received two or three more copies." As Jay's major literary contribution to the campaign for ratification in New York, the _Address_ earned an esteem comparable to that of the seventy-seven _Federalist_ letters published prior to the elections for delegates to the New York State ratifying.